docs/07Examples/00-ExamplesLanding.md, before:

---
id: ExamplesLanding
title: Example Projects
---

The Examples directory to the left contains example projects contributed by members of the OpenBCI Community and team.

## New EMG Projects and Tutorials

We added all-new tutorials for facial, ocular, and limb EMG, as well as expanded our [ECG](https://docs.openbci.com/docs/01GettingStarted/02-Biosensing-Setups/ECGSetup) and stand-alone [EMG](https://docs.openbci.com/docs/01GettingStarted/02-Biosensing-Setups/EMGSetup) tutorials! OpenBCI documentation is meant to be an actionable jumping-off point for your BCI and bio-sensing exploration.  We look forward to seeing what you create!

Note, the example projects below are written for the [Cyton Board](https://shop.openbci.com/collections/frontpage/products/cyton-biosensing-board-8-channel) but can be applied to [Ganglion board](https://shop.openbci.com/collections/frontpage/products/ganglion-board) as well.

### EMG Scrolling

[Tutorial](https://docs.openbci.com/docs/07Examples/18-EMGProjects/EMGscrolling) for touch-less scrolling with limb EMG

### EMG-controlled Stop/Start Music

[Tutorial](https://docs.openbci.com/docs/07Examples/18-EMGProjects/EMGmusic) for limb EMG-triggered music playback

### EMG-controlled Slideshow

[Tutorial](https://docs.openbci.com/docs/07Examples/18-EMGProjects/EMGslideshow) for eye, facial, or arm EMG-controlled slideshow

### EMG-controlled LED

[Tutorial](https://docs.openbci.com/docs/07Examples/18-EMGProjects/EMG_LED) for facial EMG-controlled LEDs

### EMG-controlled Chrome Browser Dinosaur Game

[Tutorial](https://docs.openbci.com/docs/07Examples/18-EMGProjects/EMG_Chrome_Dino_Game) how to play the Google Chrome Dinosaur Game without touching your laptop, using arm EMG

Commit message:

update third part landing page

docs/07Examples/00-ExamplesLanding.md, after:

---
id: ExamplesLanding
title: Example Projects
---

The Examples directory to the left contains example projects contributed by members of the OpenBCI Community and team. For even more tutorials, head to the tutorials tag in the [Community Page!](openbci.com/community)

## New EMG Projects and Tutorials

We added all-new tutorials for facial, ocular, and limb EMG, as well as expanded our [ECG](https://docs.openbci.com/docs/01GettingStarted/02-Biosensing-Setups/ECGSetup) and stand-alone [EMG](https://docs.openbci.com/docs/01GettingStarted/02-Biosensing-Setups/EMGSetup) tutorials! OpenBCI documentation is meant to be an actionable jumping-off point for your BCI and bio-sensing exploration.  We look forward to seeing what you create!

Note, the example projects below are written for the [Cyton Board](https://shop.openbci.com/collections/frontpage/products/cyton-biosensing-board-8-channel) but can be applied to [Ganglion board](https://shop.openbci.com/collections/frontpage/products/ganglion-board) as well.

### EMG Scrolling

[Tutorial](https://docs.openbci.com/docs/07Examples/18-EMGProjects/EMGscrolling) for touch-less scrolling with limb EMG

### EMG-controlled Stop/Start Music

[Tutorial](https://docs.openbci.com/docs/07Examples/18-EMGProjects/EMGmusic) for limb EMG-triggered music playback

### EMG-controlled Slideshow

[Tutorial](https://docs.openbci.com/docs/07Examples/18-EMGProjects/EMGslideshow) for eye, facial, or arm EMG-controlled slideshow

### EMG-controlled LED

[Tutorial](https://docs.openbci.com/docs/07Examples/18-EMGProjects/EMG_LED) for facial EMG-controlled LEDs

### EMG-controlled Chrome Browser Dinosaur Game

[Tutorial](https://docs.openbci.com/docs/07Examples/18-EMGProjects/EMG_Chrome_Dino_Game) how to play the Google Chrome Dinosaur Game without touching your laptop, using arm EMG
