website/docs/Welcome.md, before:

---
id: Welcome
slug: /
title: Welcome to the OpenBCI Community
---
Welcome to the **OpenBCI Learning Pages**! Here you will find a wide range of guides and tutorials that are intended to teach you how to use your OpenBCI gear. If you run into issues or have additional questions, head to our [Forum](https://openbci.com/forum/) with daily active users. Check out the [Community Page](http://openbci.com/community) for project ideas!

### The Learning Pages are separated into the following sections:

-   [Getting Started](GettingStarted/00-GettingStartedLanding.md) — Everything you need to know to setup your OpenBCI Equipment for the first time.
-   [Cyton Board](Cyton/01-CytonBoard.md) - Explanations, tutorials and examples for working with the Cyton board and Cyton+Daisy board.
-   [Ganglion Board](Ganglion/01-GanglionBoard.md) - Explanations, tutorials and examples for working with the Ganglion board.
-   [Headwear & Electrodes](AddOns/00-AddOnLanding.md) - Here you will find guides for using board attachments such as headsets, headbands, and the electrode cap.
-   [Third-Party Hardware](ThirdParty/ThirdPartyLanding.md) - Here you will find information about the OpenBCI-compatible accessories.
-   [Software](Software/SoftwareLanding.md) - This section includes guides on how to get connected to OpenBCI hardware using software developed by OpenBCI and commonly used 3rd-Party Software such as Matlab, OpenVIBE, and more!
-   [For Developers](ForDevelopers/00-ForDevelopersLanding.md) - The information in this directory will help you start developing with OpenBCI technology.
-   [Troubleshooting](Troubleshooting/00-TroubleshootingLanding.md) - Find fixes for common hardware and software issues here
-   [Examples](Examples/00-ExamplesLanding.md) - This section includes projects that members of our community have worked on.
-   [FAQ](FAQ/00-FAQ.md) - Frequently Asked Questions

### Research Published With OpenBCI

We put together [The OpenBCI Citation List](https://openbci.com/citations), a collection of recently published peer-reviewed research using OpenBCI products. We're proud of how many OpenBCI-based research reports are out there!

### Contributing

If you are interested in contributing to the OpenBCI Learning Pages, feel free to create your own Markdown file and submit a pull request to relevant sub-directory of the [Docs repo](https://github.com/openbci/Documentation) on our Github! If you notice any mistakes in these guides, you can also submit issues there.

### Real-time EEG data with OpenBCI GUI

[GUI release](https://github.com/OpenBCI/OpenBCI_GUI/releases), version 4.1.5, showing data obtained with the Ultracortex Mark IV EEG Headset 8 channel

![GUI v4.1.5](https://media.giphy.com/media/KyAYyrf3lkE6dsTKej/giphy.gif)

Head to the [Software section](Software/SoftwareLanding.md) for how-tos!

Commit message:

added doc edit instructions and fixed typo

website/docs/Welcome.md, after:

---
id: Welcome
slug: /
title: Welcome to the OpenBCI Community
---
Welcome to the **OpenBCI Learning Pages**! Here you will find a wide range of guides and tutorials that are intended to teach you how to use your OpenBCI gear. If you run into issues or have additional questions, head to our [Forum](https://openbci.com/forum/) with daily active users. Check out the [Community Page](http://openbci.com/community) for project ideas!

### The Learning Pages are separated into the following sections:

-   [Getting Started](GettingStarted/00-GettingStartedLanding.md) — Everything you need to know to setup your OpenBCI Equipment for the first time.
-   [Cyton Board](Cyton/01-CytonBoard.md) - Explanations, tutorials and examples for working with the Cyton board and Cyton+Daisy board.
-   [Ganglion Board](Ganglion/01-GanglionBoard.md) - Explanations, tutorials and examples for working with the Ganglion board.
-   [Headwear & Electrodes](AddOns/00-AddOnLanding.md) - Here you will find guides for using board attachments such as headsets, headbands, and the electrode cap.
-   [Third-Party Hardware](ThirdParty/ThirdPartyLanding.md) - Here you will find information about the OpenBCI-compatible accessories.
-   [Software](Software/SoftwareLanding.md) - This section includes guides on how to get connected to OpenBCI hardware using software developed by OpenBCI and commonly used 3rd-Party Software such as Matlab, OpenVIBE, and more!
-   [For Developers](ForDevelopers/00-ForDevelopersLanding.md) - The information in this directory will help you start developing with OpenBCI technology.
-   [Troubleshooting](Troubleshooting/00-TroubleshootingLanding.md) - Find fixes for common hardware and software issues here
-   [Examples](Examples/00-ExamplesLanding.md) - This section includes projects that members of our community have worked on.
-   [FAQ](FAQ/00-FAQ.md) - Frequently Asked Questions

### Research Published With OpenBCI

We put together [The OpenBCI Citation List](https://openbci.com/citations), a collection of recently published peer-reviewed research using OpenBCI products. We're proud of how many OpenBCI-based research reports are out there!

### Contributing

If you are interested in contributing to the OpenBCI Learning Pages, follow [this simple tutorial](GettingStarted/Documentation/01-Doc_Edits.md) on how to edit our documentation! If you notice any mistakes in these guides, you can open an issue in our [Docs Repository](https://github.com/openbci/Documentation).


### Real-time EEG data with OpenBCI GUI

[GUI release](https://github.com/OpenBCI/OpenBCI_GUI/releases), version 4.1.5, showing data obtained with the Ultracortex Mark IV EEG Headset 8 channel

![GUI v4.1.5](https://media.giphy.com/media/KyAYyrf3lkE6dsTKej/giphy.gif)

Head to the [Software section](Software/SoftwareLanding.md) for how-tos!
