website/docs/ThirdParty/WiFiShield/01-Wifi.md, before:

---
id: WiFiLanding
title: OpenBCI WiFi
---
## [BUY IT!](https://shop.openbci.com/collections/frontpage/products/wifi-shield)

WiFi Shields are available for sale [on the OpenBCI store](https://shop.openbci.com/collections/frontpage/products/wifi-shield?variant=44534009550).

The OpenBCI Wifi Shield was designed in partnership with Push The World. The OpenBCI Wifi PCB was designed with KiCAD, an Open Source PCB capture software. You can find a link to download KiCAD in our [OpenBCI design files repository](https://github.com/OpenBCI/OpenBCI_Wifi_Shield) where you will find design files and component library files to load into KiCAD and edit, if you like, along with the full BOM for this maiden production run.

## About the WiFi Shield

**IMPORTANT NOTE:** This product is in beta mode. The WiFi shield is known to have reliability issues across different computer configurations. Using it effectively requires advanced technical skills and programming knowledge. Please proceed at your own risk. OpenBCI cannot guarantee that the device will work with your configuration.

### Wifi Board Specs

-   Power with 3.3V to 6V DC battery ONLY
-   Current Draw: 150mA connected and streaming data
-   [ESP8266](http://www.esp8266.com) Wifi module (Arduino Compatible)
-   Board Dimensions 2.41" x 2.41" (octagon has 1" edges)
-   JST Power input
-   Switch to stop power to external board

### Wifi Board Circuit Schematic

![Wifi Schematic](../../assets/ThirdPartyImages/wifi_schematic.png)

### Wifi Board PCB Layer Images

Top Layer  
![Wifi Top Layer](../../assets/ThirdPartyImages/wifi_top.png)  
Bottom Layer  
![Wifi Bottom Layer](../../assets/ThirdPartyImages/wifi_bottom.png)  

### Buttons

The top push button, `RESET`, is a reset button that will power cycle the ESP8266 chip. Don't press the `RESET` button when a Ganglion is attached, if you want to power cycle the WiFi Shield, send a `;` command to the Ganglion or Cyton to trigger a power on reset of the WiFi Shield. The bottom button, `PROG`, is use for programming the WiFi Shield over serial UART and is hooked up to GPIO 0.

## GPIO Pins Used by WiFi Shield

The WiFi Shield breaks out every GPIO on the Cyton and Ganglion, however, two of the GIPO pins have been used to make the WiFi Shield work, one pin is used for reset and the other is for a chip select line used in SPI communications.

### Cyton

The WiFi Shield uses `D13` and `D18`, leaving three other pins, `D11`, `D12`, and `D17`. In analog mode this means you can't read `A7` when WiFi Shield is attached.

### Ganglion

The WiFi Shield uses `D_24` and `D_4` (`A_5`). Leaving all other pints open for use!

Commit message:

removing buy links on wifi shield page
Tried to add a :::warning box, similar to the :::tip box that is on the neurofly docs page

website/docs/ThirdParty/WiFiShield/01-Wifi.md, after:

---
id: WiFiLanding
title: OpenBCI WiFi
---

::: warning
This product is no longer offered for sale due to reliability issues. Documentation is kept here for devices in-the-wild that are still in use.
:::

The OpenBCI Wifi Shield was designed in partnership with Push The World. The OpenBCI Wifi PCB was designed with KiCAD, an Open Source PCB capture software. You can find a link to download KiCAD in our [OpenBCI design files repository](https://github.com/OpenBCI/OpenBCI_Wifi_Shield) where you will find design files and component library files to load into KiCAD and edit, if you like, along with the full BOM for this maiden production run.

## About the WiFi Shield

**IMPORTANT NOTE:** This product is in beta mode. The WiFi shield is known to have reliability issues across different computer configurations. Using it effectively requires advanced technical skills and programming knowledge. Please proceed at your own risk. OpenBCI cannot guarantee that the device will work with your configuration.

### Wifi Board Specs

-   Power with 3.3V to 6V DC battery ONLY
-   Current Draw: 150mA connected and streaming data
-   [ESP8266](http://www.esp8266.com) Wifi module (Arduino Compatible)
-   Board Dimensions 2.41" x 2.41" (octagon has 1" edges)
-   JST Power input
-   Switch to stop power to external board

### Wifi Board Circuit Schematic

![Wifi Schematic](../../assets/ThirdPartyImages/wifi_schematic.png)

### Wifi Board PCB Layer Images

Top Layer  
![Wifi Top Layer](../../assets/ThirdPartyImages/wifi_top.png)  
Bottom Layer  
![Wifi Bottom Layer](../../assets/ThirdPartyImages/wifi_bottom.png)  

### Buttons

The top push button, `RESET`, is a reset button that will power cycle the ESP8266 chip. Don't press the `RESET` button when a Ganglion is attached, if you want to power cycle the WiFi Shield, send a `;` command to the Ganglion or Cyton to trigger a power on reset of the WiFi Shield. The bottom button, `PROG`, is use for programming the WiFi Shield over serial UART and is hooked up to GPIO 0.

## GPIO Pins Used by WiFi Shield

The WiFi Shield breaks out every GPIO on the Cyton and Ganglion, however, two of the GIPO pins have been used to make the WiFi Shield work, one pin is used for reset and the other is for a chip select line used in SPI communications.

### Cyton

The WiFi Shield uses `D13` and `D18`, leaving three other pins, `D11`, `D12`, and `D17`. In analog mode this means you can't read `A7` when WiFi Shield is attached.

### Ganglion

The WiFi Shield uses `D_24` and `D_4` (`A_5`). Leaving all other pints open for use!
