docs/11ForDevelopers/03-HardwareDevelopment.md, before:

---
id: HardwareDevelopment
title: Hardware Development
---
# Overview

Welcome all Hardware Developers! Are you interested in how an OpenBCI board is made? Do you want to make one yourself or incorporate one into an existing project? This is the place for you! Here you will find resources, including full schematics, for current and past hardware.

All information provided here is licensed under the [MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)!

## OpenBCI Forum

- For anyone interested in building hardware from scratch, we recommend joining the OpenBCI Forum to learn and discuss the process with others.
- [Hardware Discussions](https://openbci.com/forum/index.php?p=/categories/hardware)
- [Electrodes Discussions](https://openbci.com/forum/index.php?p=/categories/electrodes)

## OpenBCI Hardware

### Cyton
- [Cyton Board](02Cyton/02-Cyton.md)
- [Cyton Board Schematic](02Cyton/02-Cyton.md#openbci-cyton-board-circuit-schematic)
- [External Trigger on OpenBCI Cyton Board](02Cyton/07-External_Trigger_Cyton_Example.md)

### Cyton Dongle (RFDuino)
- [OpenBCI USB Dongle](02/Cyton/02-Cyton.md#openbci-usb-dongle)
- [OpenBCI USB Dongle Schematic](02Cyton/02-Cyton.md#openbci-dongle-circuit-schematic)


### Ganglion
- [Ganglion Board](03Ganglion/02-Ganglion.md)
- [Ganglion Board Schematic](03Ganglion/02-Ganglion.md#ganglion-board-circuit-schematic)

## Third-Party Hardware

### WiFi Shield 
- [WiFi Board](05ThirdParty/03-WiFiShield/01-Wifi.md)
- [WiFi Board Schematic](05ThirdParty/03-WiFiShield/01-Wifi.md#wifi-board-circuit-schematic)

Commit message:

Update hardwareDevelopment to include headwear

docs/11ForDevelopers/03-HardwareDevelopment.md, after:

---
id: HardwareDevelopment
title: Hardware Development
---
# Overview

Welcome all Hardware Developers! Are you interested in how an OpenBCI board is made? Do you want to make one yourself or incorporate one into a project? This is the place for you! Here you will find resources, including full schematics, for current and past hardware.

All information provided here is licensed under the [MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)!

___

## OpenBCI Hardware

### Cyton
- [Cyton Board](02Cyton/02-Cyton.md)
- [Cyton Board Schematic](02Cyton/02-Cyton.md#openbci-cyton-board-circuit-schematic)
- [External Trigger on OpenBCI Cyton Board](02Cyton/07-External_Trigger_Cyton_Example.md)

### Cyton Dongle (RFDuino)
- [OpenBCI USB Dongle](02/Cyton/02-Cyton.md#openbci-usb-dongle)
- [OpenBCI USB Dongle Schematic](02Cyton/02-Cyton.md#openbci-dongle-circuit-schematic)


### Ganglion
- [Ganglion Board](03Ganglion/02-Ganglion.md)
- [Ganglion Board Schematic](03Ganglion/02-Ganglion.md#ganglion-board-circuit-schematic)

___

## OpenBCI Headwear

### Ultracortex Mark IV (June 2016 - Present)
- [Mark IV Documentation](04AddOns/01-Headwear/01-Ultracortex-Mark-IV.md)

### Ultracortex Mark III (June 2016)
- [Mark III Documentation](04AddOns/01-Headwear/02-Ultracortex-Mark-III-Nova-Revised.md)
___

## Third-Party Hardware

### WiFi Shield 
- [WiFi Board](05ThirdParty/03-WiFiShield/01-Wifi.md)
- [WiFi Board Schematic](05ThirdParty/03-WiFiShield/01-Wifi.md#wifi-board-circuit-schematic)

___

## OpenBCI Forum

- For anyone interested in building hardware from scratch, we recommend joining the OpenBCI Forum to learn and discuss the process with others.
- [Hardware Discussions](https://openbci.com/forum/index.php?p=/categories/hardware)
- [Headwear Discussions](https://openbci.com/forum/index.php?p=/categories/headware)
- [Electrodes Discussions](https://openbci.com/forum/index.php?p=/categories/electrodes)
