docs/00-Welcome.md, before:

---
id: Welcome
title: Welcome to the OpenBCI Community
---

Welcome to the **OpenBCI Learning Pages**! Here you will find a wide range of guides and tutorials that are intended to teach you how to use your OpenBCI gear. If you run into issues or have additional questions, head to our [Forum](https://openbci.com/forum/) with daily active users. Check out the [Community Page](http://openbci.com/community) for project ideas!

### The Learning Pages are separated into the following sections:

* [Getting Started](01GettingStarted/00-GettingStartedLanding.md) — Everything you need to know to setup your OpenBCI Equipment for the first time.
* [Cyton Board](02Cyton/01-CytonBoard.md) - Explanations, tutorials and examples for working with the Cyton board and Cyton+Daisy board.
* [Ganglion Board](03Ganglion/01-GanglionBoard.md) - Explanations, tutorials and examples for working with the Ganglion board.
* [Board Add-Ons](04AddOns/00-AddOnLanding.md) - Here you will find guides for using board attachments such as headsets, headbands, and the electrode cap.
* [3rd-Party Hardware](05ThirdParty/00-ThirdPartyLanding.md) - Here you will find information about the OpenBCI-compatible accessories.
* [Software](06Software/00-SoftwareLanding.md) - This section includes guides on how to get connected to OpenBCI hardware using software developed by OpenBCI and commonly used 3rd-Party Software such as Matlab, OpenVIBE, and more!
* [Examples](07Examples/00-ExamplesLanding.md) - This section includes projects that members of our community have worked on.
* [FAQ](08FAQ/00-FAQ.md) - Frequently Asked Questions


### Research Published With OpenBCI

We put together [The OpenBCI Citation List](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1WvolD2-QJ5aUJy5o0Dq5wdFQtLMkMtppZT8s_ihYyA4/edit#gid=0), a collection of recently published peer-reviewed research using OpenBCI products. We're proud of how many OpenBCI-based research reports are out there!

### Docs Website Update
You may be seeing this page if you've attempted to access a page that has moved. You can find the same information either using the dropdowns on the left, or using the search function in the top right of this window. Enjoy!

### Contributing

If you are interested in contributing to the OpenBCI Learning Pages, feel free to create your own Markdown file and submit a pull request to relevant sub-directory of the [Docs repo](https://github.com/openbci/docs) on our Github! If you notice any mistakes in these guides, you can also submit issues there.

#### Video of the OpenBCI GUI posted on [Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XktF8OhHH4A), showing the [8-channel Cyton](https://shop.openbci.com/collections/frontpage/products/cyton-biosensing-board-8-channel) Board paired with a 5-channel [EEG Headband Kit](https://shop.openbci.com/collections/frontpage/products/openbci-eeg-headband-kit).

Commit message:

update welcome page docs website update text

docs/00-Welcome.md, after:

---
id: Welcome
title: Welcome to the OpenBCI Community
---

Welcome to the **OpenBCI Learning Pages**! Here you will find a wide range of guides and tutorials that are intended to teach you how to use your OpenBCI gear. If you run into issues or have additional questions, head to our [Forum](https://openbci.com/forum/) with daily active users. Check out the [Community Page](http://openbci.com/community) for project ideas!

### The Learning Pages are separated into the following sections:

* [Getting Started](01GettingStarted/00-GettingStartedLanding.md) — Everything you need to know to setup your OpenBCI Equipment for the first time.
* [Cyton Board](02Cyton/01-CytonBoard.md) - Explanations, tutorials and examples for working with the Cyton board and Cyton+Daisy board.
* [Ganglion Board](03Ganglion/01-GanglionBoard.md) - Explanations, tutorials and examples for working with the Ganglion board.
* [Board Add-Ons](04AddOns/00-AddOnLanding.md) - Here you will find guides for using board attachments such as headsets, headbands, and the electrode cap.
* [3rd-Party Hardware](05ThirdParty/00-ThirdPartyLanding.md) - Here you will find information about the OpenBCI-compatible accessories.
* [Software](06Software/00-SoftwareLanding.md) - This section includes guides on how to get connected to OpenBCI hardware using software developed by OpenBCI and commonly used 3rd-Party Software such as Matlab, OpenVIBE, and more!
* [Examples](07Examples/00-ExamplesLanding.md) - This section includes projects that members of our community have worked on.
* [FAQ](08FAQ/00-FAQ.md) - Frequently Asked Questions


### Research Published With OpenBCI

We put together [The OpenBCI Citation List](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1WvolD2-QJ5aUJy5o0Dq5wdFQtLMkMtppZT8s_ihYyA4/edit#gid=0), a collection of recently published peer-reviewed research using OpenBCI products. We're proud of how many OpenBCI-based research reports are out there!

### Docs Website Update
We have recently updated the Docs website! You may be seeing this page if you have attempted to access a page that has moved. You can find the same information using either the dropdowns on the left or the "Search Docs" function in the top right of this window. Enjoy!

### Contributing

If you are interested in contributing to the OpenBCI Learning Pages, feel free to create your own Markdown file and submit a pull request to relevant sub-directory of the [Docs repo](https://github.com/openbci/docs) on our Github! If you notice any mistakes in these guides, you can also submit issues there.

#### Video of the OpenBCI GUI posted on [Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XktF8OhHH4A), showing the [8-channel Cyton](https://shop.openbci.com/collections/frontpage/products/cyton-biosensing-board-8-channel) Board paired with a 5-channel [EEG Headband Kit](https://shop.openbci.com/collections/frontpage/products/openbci-eeg-headband-kit).
