docs/06Software/01-OpenBCISoftware/01-OpenBCI_GUI.md, before:

---
id: GUIDocs
title: The OpenBCI GUI
---

[Suggest changes to this doc](https://github.com/OpenBCI/Docs/edit/master/OpenBCI%20Software/01-OpenBCI_GUI.md)

![image](assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/GUI-V4-Screenshot.jpg)

The OpenBCI GUI is OpenBCI's powerful software tool for visualizing, recording, and streaming data from the OpenBCI Boards. Data can be displayed in live-time, played back, saved to your computer in .txt format, as well as streamed in live-time to third-party softwares such as MATLAB. 
It can be launched as a standalone application or as a sketch from Processing (a Java-based programming language). In this guide, we will cover both scenarios.

## Hardware/Driver Setup for OpenBCI_GUI and OpenBCIHub

Shown below are the three OpenBCI Boards that can be used with the OpenBCI GUI.

![image](assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/labelledBoards.jpg)

### Ganglion on macOS
Turn on your computer's Bluetooth.

![Bluetooth On](assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/ganglion_BLE-ON.png)  

Alternatively, you can use a [small USB Dongle](https://shop.openbci.com/products/ganglion-dongle).

### Ganglion on Windows/Linux

**The OpenBCI Ganglion uses Bluetooth LE (aka Bluetooth Smart, Bluetooth 4.0) and in order to use the Ganglion, you need a [small USB Dongle](https://shop.openbci.com/products/ganglion-dongle).**

*Deprecated:* The [CSR Dongle](https://github.com/OpenBCI/Docs/blob/master/Deprecated%20Docs/Setup_CSR_Dongle.md) is no longer supported. We recommend using the [newer Ganglion Dongle](https://shop.openbci.com/products/ganglion-dongle).

### WiFi Shield

There are no prerequisites for running the WiFi Shield with Cyton or Ganglion on macOS/Windows/Linux, move on to the installation section below.

### Fix Linux Serial Port Permissions

<p>This fix affects all communications between Ganglion/Cyton and your computer via serial ports.</p><br>

<p><details><summary><i>Linux Users: Expand this dropdown for important details</i></summary><br>

Before trying to connect to any OpenBCI boards on Linux, you need to make sure you have permission to access the serial ports on your machine. Otherwise, you will get the error `Failed to connect using /dev/ttyUSB0` or similar. This can be fixed by adding the user to the `dialout` group in Ubuntu. Here is a [full explanation and fix](https://websistent.com/fix-serial-port-permission-denied-errors-linux/). Here is the short version:<br><br>

1. First, verify if the user does belong to the "dialout" group using the “id” command.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;- Type `id -Gn <username>` in terminal and check if it prints `dialout` as one of the options.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;- Replace <username> with your Linux username. Example: `id -Gn susieQ`<br>
2. Next, add the user to the “dialout” supplementary group.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;- Type `sudo usermod -a -G dialout <username>` in terminal.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;- Example: `sudo usermod -a -G dialout susieQ`<br>
3. Restart Ubuntu<br>
4. Try "id" command again<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;- Repeat step one<br>
</details></p>

## Installing the OpenBCI GUI as a "Standalone" Application

### Download the Appropriate Application For Your OS

The fastest way is to download the standalone .exe/.app for your machine and operating system. To do this, head to the [Downloads](http://openbci.com/donation) page of the OpenBCI website, and click the download link that correlates to your OS and machine.

![image](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/DownloadsUpdated.png)

### Install OpenBCI_GUI On macOS

Drag and drop the `OpenBCI_GUI` application to you `Applications` folder.

![Drag and drop application](assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/gui_drag_and_drop.png)

### Install OpenBCI_GUI On Windows

Move the `OpenBCI_GUI` directory anywhere you like.

<details><summary><i>Windows Users: How to run the GUI with High DPI Screens</i></summary>

<br>If you have a high DPI screen and are running Windows 10, you may notice that the GUI is hard to see, and nothing seems to scale correctly.<br>

1. First, close the GUI if it is open.<br>

2. Next, right click on `OpenBCI_GUI.exe` and select `Properties`. The following window should pop up:<br>

![gui windows properties menu](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/GUI-WindowsProperties.png)<br>

3. Select the `Compatibility` tab at the top of this window, and then click `Change high DPI settings`.<br>

![gui windows properties compatibility](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/GUI_WindowsProperties_Compatibility.png)<br>

4. In the section labeled `High DPI scaling override`, check the box `Override high DPI scaling behavior` and change from `Application` to `System (Enhanced)`.<br>

![gui windows override high dpi scaling](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/GUI_Windows_OverrideHighDPI.png)<br>

5. That's it! Once the settings have been changed, restart the GUI!

</details>

### Install OpenBCI_GUI On Linux

<p>Unzip the downloaded application and place in desired location.</p><br>

<p><details><summary><i>Linux Users: How to run the GUI with High DPI Screens</i></summary>

On Linux, there is no way to force scaling. However, here is a <a href ="https://github.com/kaueraal/run_scaled">link to a script that should work</a>.

</details></p>

## Running the OpenBCI_GUI

**Important Notes:**

 * In some cases, there may be issues with the way your machine handles the BLE application that enables communication with the Ganglion Board.
 * If you run into additional issues, please visit the [OpenBCI_GUI Section](https://openbci.com/forum/index.php?p=/categories/openbci_gui) of our Forum

### Running on macOS

Navigate to your `Applications` folder and double click the `OpenBCI_GUI` You may see a message pop up asking you if you're sure you want to open it. Click Open and the app will launch.

![allow GUI to run](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/ganglion_permissions.png)

### Running on Windows

Navigate to your `OpenBCI_GUI` directory, double click `OpenBCI_GUI.exe`.

If prompted, check both boxes:

![accept networking](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/gui_windows_accept_networking.png)

**As of GUI v4, the GUI will auto-launch the Hub on Windows.**

After launching the GUI, you can verify the Hub is running in your Windows tool tray.

### Running on Linux

Open a terminal application and navigate to the directory (with `cd`) of the unzipped application.

Then, launch the Application from terminal with the command:

```
$ ./OpenBCI_GUI
```
or
```
$ sudo ./OpenBCI_GUI
```

This will launch the OpenBCI_GUI and OpenBCIHub.

## Running the OpenBCI GUI From The Processing IDE

**Most users should start by running the standalone OpenBCI GUI (see previous section). The Processing IDE is for adding features or modifying existing code.**

The OpenBCI GUI was built using [Processing](https://processing.org/), a popular, Java-based creative coding framework. If you are interested in adding features or modifying the existing code, it is really easy to do so if you are familiar with Java. If you're not familiar with Java, don't fret! Processing is one of the easiest software packages to pick up as a beginner coder.


The things you will need to run the OpenBCI GUI in Processing are:  

 * [Processing App](https://processing.org/download/?processing)
 * [OpenBCI GUI Sketch](https://github.com/OpenBCI/OpenBCI_GUI)
 * [OpenBCI Electron HUB](https://github.com/OpenBCI/OpenBCI_Ganglion_Electron/releases)

First, go to processing.org and download the latest version of Processing. [Here is a walkthrough on how to install Processing on Ubuntu Linux.](http://www.artsnova.com/processing/installing-processing-ubuntu-linux-tutorial.html)

Go ahead and move it to your `Applications` folder, and launch the application. If this is the first time that you are running Processing, it will create what it calls it's `Sketch` folder in the following locations:  

 On a Mac `Users/<user-name>/Documents/Processing`  
 On Windows `C:\Users\<user-name>\Documents\Processing`  
 On Linux `/home/<user-name>/sketchbook`  

![GUI repo](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/ganglion_GUI-repo.png)

The OpenBCI GUI code repository is located on github [here](https://github.com/OpenBCI/OpenBCI_GUI). click on the `Clone or download` button in green on the right, and select `Download ZIP`. If you are a advanced GitHub user, go ahead and clone it, or fork it if you like.

After the download completes and the file extracts itself, you will see the folder called `OpenBCI_GUI-master`. Change the name of this file to `OpenBCI_GUI`. If you don't change it, it won't work! You can move the folder `OpenBCI_GUI` and it's entire contents to your Sketch folder, or put it wherever you like (Mac Example: `Users/<user-name>/Documents/GitHub/OpenBCI_GUI`).

![libraries folder](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/ganglion_libraries-folder.png)

Inside the `OpenBCI_GUI` folder, there is a folder called `libraries`. Theses are the 3rd party libraries that the OpenBCI GUI uses to work it's magic. You need to **copy** all of these folders into:

On a Mac `Users/<user-name>/Documents/Processing/libraries`  
On Windows `C:\Users\Username\Documents\Processing\libraries`  
On Linux `/home/<user-name>/sketchbook/libraries`

If there is no folder called `libraries` in that location, go ahead and make one. Once you have done that, close the Processing app and reopen it. If you get an error saying "Duplicate Packages", you may need to remove the `jna` package from the `Processing\libraries` folder. _The next big step is to add the OpenBCI Hub (backend communication) in the data directory._

### Install OpenBCI Hub on Mac/Linux/Windows

![OBCI Electron github](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/hub-github-release.png)   

There is a piece of software which is necessary to make the connection between the GUI and your computer's Bluetooth hardware.
We call this the OpenBCI Electron Hub. Go to our github repository for the [Hub](https://github.com/OpenBCI/OpenBCI_Hub/releases/latest), and click on the link for your Operating System.  

![electron hub download](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/hub-unzipped-windows.png)

After downloading and un-packing, your Downloads folder will look like this on Windows/Linux. On Mac, you'll just have an OpenBCIHub.app file.

#### On Mac, move the `OpenBCIHub.app` to:

`/users/<user-name>/Documents/Processing/OpenBCI_GUI/OpenBCI_GUI/data/OpenBCIHub.app`

#### On Linux:

Rename the directory you just unpacked to `OpenBCIHub` and move it to:

`<path-to-processing>/Processing/OpenBCI_GUI/OpenBCI_GUI/data/`

#### On Windows:

Rename the directory you just unpacked to `OpenBCIHub` and move it to:

`C:\users\<user-name>\Documents\Processing\OpenBCI_GUI\OpenBCI_GUI\data\`

![Hub Home](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/hub-installed-processing.png)

Enter the new OpenBCIHub folder and right click on the executable -> properties -> compatibility -> tick "Run this program as an administrator".

![set to run as admin always](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/gui_windows_properties_run_as_admin_hub.png)

Then double click the executable to run it for the first time. You must check both check boxes when prompted.

![accept networking](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/gui_windows_accept_networking.png)

Then quit the HUB: click the tray icon, and then press the quit button.

![quit the hub](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/gui_windows_openbci_hub_quit.png)

As of GUI v4.0.3, the GUI will auto-launch the Hub on Windows.

### Open The OpenBCI GUI Project in Processing & Launch It!

![processing startup](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/ganglion_processing-launch.png)

**If you are on Windows, set Processing to 'Run this program as an administrator'.**

When you get Processing running again, you will see a window open up. This is the Processing IDE (Integrated Development Environment).

![Select Sketchbook](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/ganglion_file-sketchbook.png)
![Select OpenBCI GUI from Sketchbook](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/ganglion_sketchbook-window.png)

Select `File > Sketchbook` and you will open a window where you should see the option to select `OpenBCI GUI`. When you get that far, select `OpenBCI GUI` and the Processing will open up yet another window, that contains all the code to successfully run the OpenBCI GUI.  

![GUI code window](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/ganglion_GUI-code-window.png)

If you don't know anything about coding, don't edit these files. If you like to dig in to the meat of what makes things work, by all means. have at it. You are looking at the program code that makes the OpenBCI GUI work it's magic. Now, it's time to run it!

![Processing RUN](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/ganglion_processing-RUN.png)

Press the `play` button on the upper left of the IDE, and the sketch will try to launch in all it's glory. If this is your first time running the sketch, you will get a message from the Mac OS that will ask you if you will allow permission for an unsigned app to run. The app in question is the Electron Hub. If you've enabled apps to run from Anywhere, you can just give permission to run the app. However, it is likely that the GUI will not function, because timing is everything. You will need to quit the sketch (press `command+q` or click the `x` button on the upper left of the GUI). Then, relaunch the sketch by pressing the `play` button as above. This time you won't get the alert from the Mac OS, and the GUI will launch in all it's glory!  

If you are encountering issues launching the GUI at this point, please head to the [OpenBCI_GUI section](https://openbci.com/forum/index.php?p=/categories/openbci_gui) of our Forum and look for help or post a question.

### Using the OpenBCI GUI

![use gui](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/USE-GUI.jpg)

Check out this [Youtube video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=agV1B2l-QLw) on how to use the OpenBCI GUI. Note: Uses an older version of the GUI.

By default, the GUI stores all user data and raw EEG recordings in `Documents/OpenBCI_GUI` and names each session with an autogenerated timestamp by default. Older versions of the GUI save data to `SavedData` in the same root directory as the app.

## Customize Your Layout

The OpenBCI GUI displays up to six customizable windows in twelve layouts! You can choose what each window displays by clicking the dropdown menu at the upper left of each window. In the screengrab below, my GUI is showing Time Series, FFT Plot, and Accelerometer.

Also, you can see an impedance test has been started on Channel 1. See the next section "Impedance Testing" for more information.

<img src="https://github.com/OpenBCI/Docs/blob/master/assets/images/GUI_Impedance.png?raw=true" width="100%">

## Impedance Testing
When using Cyton, you can display the impedance of individual channels by toggling the small Ohm icon to the right of each color coded channel number in the Time Series Widget. When the Ohm icon is toggled on, the board sends a small current through the selected channel to obtain the impedance value. **For this reason, you won't be able to stream data on a channel and obtain the impedance value simultaneously.**

To test impedance for Ganglion, use the Ganglion Signal Widget.

<img src="https://github.com/OpenBCI/Docs/blob/master/assets/images/ganglion_signal_widget-impedance_check.png?raw=true" width="50%">

## Decrease Setup Time by Saving/Loading Settings
Starting with GUI V3, you can save and load a snapshot of nearly every setting in the GUI (ex. Layout, Time Series Channel Settings, Networking Settings, etc.) by using a dropdown menu (pictured below) or keyboard shortcuts. If you change anything during a session, save your settings or click "Stop System" before exiting. __Save with lowercase 'n'__ and __Load with capital 'N'__ on your keyboard to and from */Documents/OpenBCI_GUI/Settings/*.

![Config Button](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/GUI_Config_Button_ScreenshotRev3.png)

Start the system first. Then, arrange the GUI to suit your needs and __click "Settings"-->"Save"__. A dialog box will open to confirm file name and path _(e.g. GanglionUserSettings.json)_. After, you will see a message saying "Settings Saved!" When you click "Stop System", all settings will be auto-saved.

The GUI automatically loads settings from */Documents/OpenBCI_GUI/Settings/* when the system starts!

To load settings, just __click "Settings"-->"Load"__. Select a settings file from the dialog box that opens. If the settings are incompatible (ex. loading 16 channels while using 8), the GUI will display an error at the bottom or "Default Settings Loaded". If all is well, the GUI will display "Settings Loaded!" as the GUI snaps directly to your desired settings.

__Click "Settings"-->"Default" to revert the GUI to default settings.__

When in Live Mode, the GUI will load your settings automatically. Please allow 1-2 seconds to successfully apply settings to Cyton and Ganglion boards. _During this stage, the Dongle will blink red as it sends channel settings to the Cyton._ If loading takes more than a few seconds, there may be a connection issue with the board. An error should print at the bottom of the GUI if this happens.

## GUI Keyboard Shortcuts
__Use the spacebar to start or stop the data stream!__

### Expert Mode

__To enable all keyboard shortcuts, set "Expert Mode On" in the settings dropdown.__

![Expert Mode Button](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/expertModeToggleHelpText.png)

Expert Mode Keyboard Shortcuts:

- Other than spacebar, you can press 's' to stop data stream, and 'b' to begin, or start the data stream.

- You can _use lowercase 'k' to set "Bias Don't Include"_ on all channels, or _lowercase 'l' to set "Bias Include"_ on all channels.

- __Press lowercase 'd' to set all channels settings to default.__

- Using an _English keyboard_, you can deactivate channels 1-16 using:
  - 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8
  - q,w,e,r,t,y,u,i

- Similarly, activate channels 1-16 using:
  - !, @, #, $, %, ^, &, *
  - Q,W,E,R,T,Y,U,I

- __Take a screenshot of the GUI using lowercase 'm'!__ It will be saved to */Documents/OpenBCI_GUI/Settings/*.

- __Enter presentation mode using Enter (Win), or Return (Mac).__

- To change to the alternate color scheme, use '{' .

Commit message:

Add info to GUI doc to convert large SD recordings w/ screenshot #15

docs/06Software/01-OpenBCISoftware/01-OpenBCI_GUI.md, after:

---
id: GUIDocs
title: The OpenBCI GUI
---

[Suggest changes to this doc](https://github.com/OpenBCI/Docs/edit/master/OpenBCI%20Software/01-OpenBCI_GUI.md)

![image](assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/GUI-V4-Screenshot.jpg)

The OpenBCI GUI is OpenBCI's powerful software tool for visualizing, recording, and streaming data from the OpenBCI Boards. Data can be displayed in live-time, played back, saved to your computer in .txt format, as well as streamed in live-time to third-party softwares such as MATLAB. 
It can be launched as a standalone application or as a sketch from Processing (a Java-based programming language). In this guide, we will cover both scenarios.

## Hardware/Driver Setup for OpenBCI_GUI and OpenBCIHub

Shown below are the three OpenBCI Boards that can be used with the OpenBCI GUI.

![image](assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/labelledBoards.jpg)

### Ganglion on macOS
Turn on your computer's Bluetooth.

![Bluetooth On](assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/ganglion_BLE-ON.png)  

Alternatively, you can use a [small USB Dongle](https://shop.openbci.com/products/ganglion-dongle).

### Ganglion on Windows/Linux

**The OpenBCI Ganglion uses Bluetooth LE (aka Bluetooth Smart, Bluetooth 4.0) and in order to use the Ganglion, you need a [small USB Dongle](https://shop.openbci.com/products/ganglion-dongle).**

*Deprecated:* The [CSR Dongle](https://github.com/OpenBCI/Docs/blob/master/Deprecated%20Docs/Setup_CSR_Dongle.md) is no longer supported. We recommend using the [newer Ganglion Dongle](https://shop.openbci.com/products/ganglion-dongle).

### WiFi Shield

There are no prerequisites for running the WiFi Shield with Cyton or Ganglion on macOS/Windows/Linux, move on to the installation section below.

### Fix Linux Serial Port Permissions

<p>This fix affects all communications between Ganglion/Cyton and your computer via serial ports.</p><br>

<p><details><summary><i>Linux Users: Expand this dropdown for important details</i></summary><br>

Before trying to connect to any OpenBCI boards on Linux, you need to make sure you have permission to access the serial ports on your machine. Otherwise, you will get the error `Failed to connect using /dev/ttyUSB0` or similar. This can be fixed by adding the user to the `dialout` group in Ubuntu. Here is a [full explanation and fix](https://websistent.com/fix-serial-port-permission-denied-errors-linux/). Here is the short version:<br><br>

1. First, verify if the user does belong to the "dialout" group using the “id” command.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;- Type `id -Gn <username>` in terminal and check if it prints `dialout` as one of the options.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;- Replace <username> with your Linux username. Example: `id -Gn susieQ`<br>
2. Next, add the user to the “dialout” supplementary group.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;- Type `sudo usermod -a -G dialout <username>` in terminal.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;- Example: `sudo usermod -a -G dialout susieQ`<br>
3. Restart Ubuntu<br>
4. Try "id" command again<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;- Repeat step one<br>
</details></p>

## Installing the OpenBCI GUI as a "Standalone" Application

### Download the Appropriate Application For Your OS

The fastest way is to download the standalone .exe/.app for your machine and operating system. To do this, head to the [Downloads](http://openbci.com/donation) page of the OpenBCI website, and click the download link that correlates to your OS and machine.

![image](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/DownloadsUpdated.png)

### Install OpenBCI_GUI On macOS

Drag and drop the `OpenBCI_GUI` application to you `Applications` folder.

![Drag and drop application](assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/gui_drag_and_drop.png)

### Install OpenBCI_GUI On Windows

Move the `OpenBCI_GUI` directory anywhere you like.

<details><summary><i>Windows Users: How to run the GUI with High DPI Screens</i></summary>

<br>If you have a high DPI screen and are running Windows 10, you may notice that the GUI is hard to see, and nothing seems to scale correctly.<br>

1. First, close the GUI if it is open.<br>

2. Next, right click on `OpenBCI_GUI.exe` and select `Properties`. The following window should pop up:<br>

![gui windows properties menu](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/GUI-WindowsProperties.png)<br>

3. Select the `Compatibility` tab at the top of this window, and then click `Change high DPI settings`.<br>

![gui windows properties compatibility](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/GUI_WindowsProperties_Compatibility.png)<br>

4. In the section labeled `High DPI scaling override`, check the box `Override high DPI scaling behavior` and change from `Application` to `System (Enhanced)`.<br>

![gui windows override high dpi scaling](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/GUI_Windows_OverrideHighDPI.png)<br>

5. That's it! Once the settings have been changed, restart the GUI!

</details>

### Install OpenBCI_GUI On Linux

<p>Unzip the downloaded application and place in desired location.</p><br>

<p><details><summary><i>Linux Users: How to run the GUI with High DPI Screens</i></summary>

On Linux, there is no way to force scaling. However, here is a <a href ="https://github.com/kaueraal/run_scaled">link to a script that should work</a>.

</details></p>

## Running the OpenBCI_GUI

**Important Notes:**

 * In some cases, there may be issues with the way your machine handles the BLE application that enables communication with the Ganglion Board.
 * If you run into additional issues, please visit the [OpenBCI_GUI Section](https://openbci.com/forum/index.php?p=/categories/openbci_gui) of our Forum

### Running on macOS

Navigate to your `Applications` folder and double click the `OpenBCI_GUI` You may see a message pop up asking you if you're sure you want to open it. Click Open and the app will launch.

![allow GUI to run](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/ganglion_permissions.png)

### Running on Windows

Navigate to your `OpenBCI_GUI` directory, double click `OpenBCI_GUI.exe`.

If prompted, check both boxes:

![accept networking](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/gui_windows_accept_networking.png)

**As of GUI v4, the GUI will auto-launch the Hub on Windows.**

After launching the GUI, you can verify the Hub is running in your Windows tool tray.

### Running on Linux

Open a terminal application and navigate to the directory (with `cd`) of the unzipped application.

Then, launch the Application from terminal with the command:

```
$ ./OpenBCI_GUI
```
or
```
$ sudo ./OpenBCI_GUI
```

This will launch the OpenBCI_GUI and OpenBCIHub.

## Running the OpenBCI GUI From The Processing IDE

**Most users should start by running the standalone OpenBCI GUI (see previous section). The Processing IDE is for adding features or modifying existing code.**

The OpenBCI GUI was built using [Processing](https://processing.org/), a popular, Java-based creative coding framework. If you are interested in adding features or modifying the existing code, it is really easy to do so if you are familiar with Java. If you're not familiar with Java, don't fret! Processing is one of the easiest software packages to pick up as a beginner coder.


The things you will need to run the OpenBCI GUI in Processing are:  

 * [Processing App](https://processing.org/download/?processing)
 * [OpenBCI GUI Sketch](https://github.com/OpenBCI/OpenBCI_GUI)
 * [OpenBCI Electron HUB](https://github.com/OpenBCI/OpenBCI_Ganglion_Electron/releases)

First, go to processing.org and download the latest version of Processing. [Here is a walkthrough on how to install Processing on Ubuntu Linux.](http://www.artsnova.com/processing/installing-processing-ubuntu-linux-tutorial.html)

Go ahead and move it to your `Applications` folder, and launch the application. If this is the first time that you are running Processing, it will create what it calls it's `Sketch` folder in the following locations:  

 On a Mac `Users/<user-name>/Documents/Processing`  
 On Windows `C:\Users\<user-name>\Documents\Processing`  
 On Linux `/home/<user-name>/sketchbook`  

![GUI repo](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/ganglion_GUI-repo.png)

The OpenBCI GUI code repository is located on github [here](https://github.com/OpenBCI/OpenBCI_GUI). click on the `Clone or download` button in green on the right, and select `Download ZIP`. If you are a advanced GitHub user, go ahead and clone it, or fork it if you like.

After the download completes and the file extracts itself, you will see the folder called `OpenBCI_GUI-master`. Change the name of this file to `OpenBCI_GUI`. If you don't change it, it won't work! You can move the folder `OpenBCI_GUI` and it's entire contents to your Sketch folder, or put it wherever you like (Mac Example: `Users/<user-name>/Documents/GitHub/OpenBCI_GUI`).

![libraries folder](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/ganglion_libraries-folder.png)

Inside the `OpenBCI_GUI` folder, there is a folder called `libraries`. Theses are the 3rd party libraries that the OpenBCI GUI uses to work it's magic. You need to **copy** all of these folders into:

On a Mac `Users/<user-name>/Documents/Processing/libraries`  
On Windows `C:\Users\Username\Documents\Processing\libraries`  
On Linux `/home/<user-name>/sketchbook/libraries`

If there is no folder called `libraries` in that location, go ahead and make one. Once you have done that, close the Processing app and reopen it. If you get an error saying "Duplicate Packages", you may need to remove the `jna` package from the `Processing\libraries` folder. _The next big step is to add the OpenBCI Hub (backend communication) in the data directory._

### Install OpenBCI Hub on Mac/Linux/Windows

![OBCI Electron github](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/hub-github-release.png)   

There is a piece of software which is necessary to make the connection between the GUI and your computer's Bluetooth hardware.
We call this the OpenBCI Electron Hub. Go to our github repository for the [Hub](https://github.com/OpenBCI/OpenBCI_Hub/releases/latest), and click on the link for your Operating System.  

![electron hub download](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/hub-unzipped-windows.png)

After downloading and un-packing, your Downloads folder will look like this on Windows/Linux. On Mac, you'll just have an OpenBCIHub.app file.

#### On Mac, move the `OpenBCIHub.app` to:

`/users/<user-name>/Documents/Processing/OpenBCI_GUI/OpenBCI_GUI/data/OpenBCIHub.app`

#### On Linux:

Rename the directory you just unpacked to `OpenBCIHub` and move it to:

`<path-to-processing>/Processing/OpenBCI_GUI/OpenBCI_GUI/data/`

#### On Windows:

Rename the directory you just unpacked to `OpenBCIHub` and move it to:

`C:\users\<user-name>\Documents\Processing\OpenBCI_GUI\OpenBCI_GUI\data\`

![Hub Home](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/hub-installed-processing.png)

Enter the new OpenBCIHub folder and right click on the executable -> properties -> compatibility -> tick "Run this program as an administrator".

![set to run as admin always](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/gui_windows_properties_run_as_admin_hub.png)

Then double click the executable to run it for the first time. You must check both check boxes when prompted.

![accept networking](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/gui_windows_accept_networking.png)

Then quit the HUB: click the tray icon, and then press the quit button.

![quit the hub](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/gui_windows_openbci_hub_quit.png)

As of GUI v4.0.3, the GUI will auto-launch the Hub on Windows.

### Open The OpenBCI GUI Project in Processing & Launch It!

![processing startup](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/ganglion_processing-launch.png)

**If you are on Windows, set Processing to 'Run this program as an administrator'.**

When you get Processing running again, you will see a window open up. This is the Processing IDE (Integrated Development Environment).

![Select Sketchbook](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/ganglion_file-sketchbook.png)
![Select OpenBCI GUI from Sketchbook](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/ganglion_sketchbook-window.png)

Select `File > Sketchbook` and you will open a window where you should see the option to select `OpenBCI GUI`. When you get that far, select `OpenBCI GUI` and the Processing will open up yet another window, that contains all the code to successfully run the OpenBCI GUI.  

![GUI code window](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/ganglion_GUI-code-window.png)

If you don't know anything about coding, don't edit these files. If you like to dig in to the meat of what makes things work, by all means. have at it. You are looking at the program code that makes the OpenBCI GUI work it's magic. Now, it's time to run it!

![Processing RUN](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/ganglion_processing-RUN.png)

Press the `play` button on the upper left of the IDE, and the sketch will try to launch in all it's glory. If this is your first time running the sketch, you will get a message from the Mac OS that will ask you if you will allow permission for an unsigned app to run. The app in question is the Electron Hub. If you've enabled apps to run from Anywhere, you can just give permission to run the app. However, it is likely that the GUI will not function, because timing is everything. You will need to quit the sketch (press `command+q` or click the `x` button on the upper left of the GUI). Then, relaunch the sketch by pressing the `play` button as above. This time you won't get the alert from the Mac OS, and the GUI will launch in all it's glory!  

If you are encountering issues launching the GUI at this point, please head to the [OpenBCI_GUI section](https://openbci.com/forum/index.php?p=/categories/openbci_gui) of our Forum and look for help or post a question.

### Using the OpenBCI GUI

![use gui](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/USE-GUI.jpg)

Check out this [Youtube video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=agV1B2l-QLw) on how to use the OpenBCI GUI. Note: Uses an older version of the GUI.

By default, the GUI stores all user data and raw EEG recordings in `Documents/OpenBCI_GUI` and names each session with an autogenerated timestamp by default. Older versions of the GUI save data to `SavedData` in the same root directory as the app.

## Customize Your Layout

The OpenBCI GUI displays up to six customizable windows in twelve layouts! You can choose what each window displays by clicking the dropdown menu at the upper left of each window. In the screengrab below, my GUI is showing Time Series, FFT Plot, and Accelerometer.

Also, you can see an impedance test has been started on Channel 1. See the next section "Impedance Testing" for more information.

<img src="https://github.com/OpenBCI/Docs/blob/master/assets/images/GUI_Impedance.png?raw=true" width="100%">

## Impedance Testing
When using Cyton, you can display the impedance of individual channels by toggling the small Ohm icon to the right of each color coded channel number in the Time Series Widget. When the Ohm icon is toggled on, the board sends a small current through the selected channel to obtain the impedance value. **For this reason, you won't be able to stream data on a channel and obtain the impedance value simultaneously.**

To test impedance for Ganglion, use the Ganglion Signal Widget.

<img src="https://github.com/OpenBCI/Docs/blob/master/assets/images/ganglion_signal_widget-impedance_check.png?raw=true" width="50%">

## Decrease Setup Time by Saving/Loading Settings
Starting with GUI V3, you can save and load a snapshot of nearly every setting in the GUI (ex. Layout, Time Series Channel Settings, Networking Settings, etc.) by using a dropdown menu (pictured below) or keyboard shortcuts. If you change anything during a session, save your settings or click "Stop System" before exiting. __Save with lowercase 'n'__ and __Load with capital 'N'__ on your keyboard to and from */Documents/OpenBCI_GUI/Settings/*.

![Config Button](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/GUI_Config_Button_ScreenshotRev3.png)

Start the system first. Then, arrange the GUI to suit your needs and __click "Settings"-->"Save"__. A dialog box will open to confirm file name and path _(e.g. GanglionUserSettings.json)_. After, you will see a message saying "Settings Saved!" When you click "Stop System", all settings will be auto-saved.

The GUI automatically loads settings from */Documents/OpenBCI_GUI/Settings/* when the system starts!

To load settings, just __click "Settings"-->"Load"__. Select a settings file from the dialog box that opens. If the settings are incompatible (ex. loading 16 channels while using 8), the GUI will display an error at the bottom or "Default Settings Loaded". If all is well, the GUI will display "Settings Loaded!" as the GUI snaps directly to your desired settings.

__Click "Settings"-->"Default" to revert the GUI to default settings.__

When in Live Mode, the GUI will load your settings automatically. Please allow 1-2 seconds to successfully apply settings to Cyton and Ganglion boards. _During this stage, the Dongle will blink red as it sends channel settings to the Cyton._ If loading takes more than a few seconds, there may be a connection issue with the board. An error should print at the bottom of the GUI if this happens.

## GUI Keyboard Shortcuts
__Use the spacebar to start or stop the data stream!__

### Expert Mode

__To enable all keyboard shortcuts, set "Expert Mode On" in the settings dropdown.__

![Expert Mode Button](../../assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/expertModeToggleHelpText.png)

Expert Mode Keyboard Shortcuts:

- Other than spacebar, you can press 's' to stop data stream, and 'b' to begin, or start the data stream.

- You can _use lowercase 'k' to set "Bias Don't Include"_ on all channels, or _lowercase 'l' to set "Bias Include"_ on all channels.

- __Press lowercase 'd' to set all channels settings to default.__

- Using an _English keyboard_, you can deactivate channels 1-16 using:
  - 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8
  - q,w,e,r,t,y,u,i

- Similarly, activate channels 1-16 using:
  - !, @, #, $, %, ^, &, *
  - Q,W,E,R,T,Y,U,I

- __Take a screenshot of the GUI using lowercase 'm'!__ It will be saved to */Documents/OpenBCI_GUI/Settings/*.

- __Enter presentation mode using Enter (Win), or Return (Mac).__

- To change to the alternate color scheme, use '{'.

## Converting Large SD Card Recordings

In order to convert large SD card recordings made using Cyton or Cyton+Daisy, you will need to run the GUI from Processing, as described here in the docs. As mentioned in the screenshot below, open Processing preferences and increase max available memory to at least 9GB to convert a 12 hour SD recording.

![GUI Screenshot convert large SD recording](assets/SoftwareImages/OpenBCISoftware/gui_convert_large_SD_recordings_scrnshot.png)
