website/docs/FAQ/04-PaymentFAQ.md, before:

---
id: PaymentFAQ
title: Purchases & Payment Processing
---
Please note all orders ship **after** full payment. Orders cannot be split between multiple shipments. To make a change to your order, please email [support@openbci.com](mailto:support@openbci.com) ASAP. We cannot guarantee that we can satisfy the request, but we will do our best if contacted in a timely fashion.

## How do I request a quotation or an invoice?

There are two methods of getting a quotation. The first and faster method is to make a customer [account](https://shop.openbci.com/account/register) with your email and shipping address. Then, email [sales@openbci.com](mailto:sales@openbci.com) with a list of products wanted. We will then quickly follow up with a PDF quote.

The second method-
Please email us at [contact@openbci.com](mailto:contact@openbci.com), with the items you want in the quotation and the shipping address in the format below to give you an accurate shipping rate.

First name:

Last name:

Email:

Company:

Phone number:

Address:

Address con't:

City:

Country:

Region/State/Province:

Postal/zip code\*:

Tax ID or VAT:

## When will my credit card be charged?

Our store system will authorize your card the moment you place your order and a settlement (debit) will likely occur within 48 hours.

Commit message:

Updated "How do I request a quotation or an invoice?" copy in 04-PaymentFAQ.md
I updated the copy in section "How do I request a quotation or an invoice?" to be more helpful and accurate for customers.

website/docs/FAQ/04-PaymentFAQ.md, after:

---
id: PaymentFAQ
title: Purchases & Payment Processing
---
Please note all orders ship **after** full payment. Orders cannot be split between multiple shipments. To make a change to your order, please email [support@openbci.com](mailto:support@openbci.com) ASAP. We cannot guarantee that we can satisfy the request, but we will do our best if contacted in a timely fashion.

## How do I request a quotation or an invoice?

To receive a quote, please make a [customer account](https://shop.openbci.com/account/register) and add your shipping address to your account. You can add your address by clicking “view addresses” on the right hand side of the screen. Then click “Add a new address”. 

After this step is complete, please email us at [sales@openbci.com](mailto:sales@openbci.com) and provide the following info:
1. The email address associated with your OpenBCI account
2. The full list of products and quantities you’d like on your quote
  
You can find all of our products listed on our online store: shop.openbci.com 


## When will my credit card be charged?

Our store system will authorize your card the moment you place your order and a settlement (debit) will likely occur within 48 hours.
